need three columns, unique ID, temperature and trait response.
the initial R script should add starting values based on the exponential part of the curve
get the script running to start doing the cubic fits. use the lm function to fit the cubic to the data, not nlls.
then nlls needs to fit the boltzmann/schoolfield to the data which will be hard
which curves have evidence that the model fits properly?

temp on the x asis and rate on the y axis
doesnt matter whether we use the standard or original trait value, it wont change the shape of the curve
use the cubic because it is curvy enough to fit the strange data shape.???????????????? then take the log of the exponential part to straigten the line out
look at the schoolfield paper, it has models fitted to data
create a test output to just look at the ouput of one model-------------------
final csv output should contain the unique values and fitted values?????????????????????????????????????????
then need to fit AIC and BIC to the datasets and say on average which model is most useful
We can write the code in R if we feel like python is too hard to grasp, try to use python but R is acceptable

READ THE SHARP SCHOOLFIELD PAPER and look at the log-transformed data with a line fitting through it

can try choosing random starting values, dont be afraid to choose random ones cause it can be fixed later

the deactivation energy part of the curve is steeper than the activation energy so De is greater than e
e = 0.65
Ed = 5 to 10 * e

start the starting value lower than 0.65 in case the response is weaker than expected.
fit the curves with 100 starting values and keep the one(s) that work, dont be afraid to use computing power!

lots of data isn't good enough to fit the model so be prepared to discard ~20% of it

B0 is the trait value at 10 degrees C. make sure which units youre using! convert all temperatures to Kelvins for NLLS. Celsius is okay for lm.

B0 is the rate at a certain temperature, the rest of the equation goes to 1 at a certain temp and that is how we can see what B0 is.
The data might not contain the value of B0 though.
B0 can be chosen from runif to start with, use these to maximise the NLLS fit. B0 units are the same as the units of the trait value


TH is the temp at which 50% of the enzymes are denatured due to high temp
TL is the temp at which 50% of the enzymes cant work because its too cold
TL must be lower than TH. All in Kelvins. TH must be in the region of the peak of the curve


Even if the dataset only has the rising part, you can still fit the cubic to t	he data. It just wont give a sensible falling part.

Write own schoolfield function to fit to one dataset. take a log of NLLS, its easier for it to converge if its logged.

Also look at the NLLS EEC lectures Samraat added to our BlackBoard



